## Intro

### 101. Blockchains, wallets and Stacks.

A blockchain is basically an open distributed database with immutable records (new records are added overtime). The most simple use-case for a blockchain is a ledger. With that ledger you can track how much money(token) each account has and all transfers. A blockchain can store more than money transfers, it also can store some data. The most notable data in a blockchain would be:
1) NFTs - that is just a digital certificate of ownage (like papers for your house or a car)
2) Smart contract - its the code that can be executed by blockchain nodes (if their support smart contracts)

From a user perspective the interaction with a blockchain occurs using a wallet. In most simple terms, 
the wallet is a pair of:
1) Your private key - its like a password to you wallet (but its final and unchangeable and unrecoverable), the loss of a private key is fatal!
2) The public address (which is bound to that private key) - you give/use that address as would you give/use your bank account number.
To interact with a blockchain (for instance to transfer funds) you need to send commands to blockchain nodes, there is open API for that.
However, to manager their tokens and NFTs, a common user uses a wallet software (like Metamask or Hiro wallet for Stacks) 
that uses that API behind the scene. 
A blockchain is designed that way that it can store records only approved with sender's private key. In other words **only those who
has a wallet's private key can use funds from that wallet**. And that's why is is **absolutely essential to keep that private key safe and secure**. 

Usually the wallet data (private key/address) is generated by a wallet software without using any remote services, on the user's computer.

Having said that let's deduce the main benefit of a blockchain:
* No need for 3rd party servers to manager your funds (only you have your private key)
* All your funds are available at all times and solely under your control.

There are lots of different blockchains, all have their advantanges and drawbacks (e.g. transaction speed/cost). But surely there is one worth noting - Bitcoin. Bitcoin has proven its efficiency and great security other the years. But until recently there was no ability to use smart contracts on Bitcoin. Smart contracts allow to create rules that users can trigger using their wallet. The example of a simple smart contract would be - "if you pay me 10 tokens you will receive this beautiful NFT." Why is it needed? If there was no such smart contract, you would need to do that manually and not in secure manner:
1) Send 10 tokens to NFT owner
2) Wait for him to send that NFT to you - you have to trust that person will send that NFT eventually.

**Smart contracts are dead-set they either executed successfully (and all transfers are guaranteed) or fail completely (and no transfers occur).**

So there Stacks arrives. Stacks extends security of Bitcoin and creates layer of smart contracts. Moreover Stacks' smart contracts are only type of smart contracts (across all popular blockchains) that are human readable. That allows double-checking, more efficient bug detection and malware detection.

Read more about stacks at: https://www.stacks.co/

### 101. Transactions.

Transaction is a set of instructions signed with your wallet's private key. Transactions are needed to add new records to a blockchain. In most common case transaction is generated by your wallet (e.g. transfer funds). Then it is sent to be processed by blockchain nodes. Blockchain nodes require an incentive to process transactions, that's is why **every transaction has a fee** (often called 'gas fees'). That resembles a commission for a bank operation. The fee is determined by the wallet software (and sometimes can be altered by a user). Different blockchains have different gas fees. Be careful to review transaction's fee before sending it. After transactions is send and accepted (for example it can be rejected if malformed or incorrectly signed) by blockchain nodes it enters 'Pending' state. Depending on the fee, blockchain type and its current state a transation **may take some time to be processed** and its result is written to the blockchain. Sometimes its seconds, sometimes minutes; in case blockchain nodes are under heavy load it might take hours. If the fee is too low transaction might be ignored completely.
Unprocessed transactions are discarded after a timeout.

Read more at: https://docs.stacks.co/docs/understand-stacks/transactions

### 101. Smart contracts.
Smart contracts are the code written in blockchain's language (for Stacks its Clarity language). That code can be send and recorded in a blockchain (again using a transaction). After that you can create transactions that execute that code. That gives an ability to do much more that simply transfer funds. All the results of a smart contract execution is written to the blockchain. Executing smart contracts are much more expensive operation than a simple funds transfer. Therefore transaction fees for that case might/should be higher. The more a smart contract writes to a blockchain or/and uses CPU time the more it costs. In general any smart contract should be fast and store only essentials data (e.g. not an image/text/data but its hash). The power is smart contracts is huge but use them with care. For instance (and it happened too many times already) malicious smart contracts can steal all your founds. There are two great things about Stacks smart contracts:
* they are stored in **human-readable form** (a developer can read and understand what a smart contact will do)
* there are **post-conditions** that can be included within any transaction (if they are not satisfied then transaction aborts);
the example of post-condition: 'transfer at most 10 tokens from my account'. 
Any decent Stacks application will add and display that post-conditions to a user for confirmation before calling into any smart-contract.

Read more at: https://docs.stacks.co/docs/write-smart-contracts/

### 101. Mainnet and Testnet.
Apart from the blockchain itself (often referred as mainnet) there lives its test version (testnet). Testnet has the same features and APIs and also an ability to receive free tokens. Therefore testnet can (and should) be used for early testing of any code and smart contracts. There can be no harm done to users and developers because any testnet assets worth nothing. As an alpha test you can launch your product on a testnet and then procede with mainnet launch.

Read more at: https://docs.stacks.co/docs/understand-stacks/testnet
